@node Completely Fair Scheduler
@appendix Completely Fair Scheduler

@iftex
@macro tm{TEX}
@math{\TEX\}
@end macro
@macro nm{TXT}
@end macro
@macro am{TEX, TXT}
@math{\TEX\}
@end macro
@end iftex

@ifnottex
@macro tm{TEX}
@end macro
@macro nm{TXT}
@w{\TXT\}
@end macro
@macro am{TEX, TXT}
@w{\TXT\}
@end macro
@end ifnottex

@ifhtml
@macro math{TXT}
\TXT\
@end macro
@end ifhtml

@macro m{MATH}
@am{\MATH\, \MATH\}
@end macro

For project 1, you must implement the scheduler described in this
appendix. This scheduler is a simplified version of the Completely Fair
Scheduler (@acronym{CFS}) in Linux, which in turn is a variant of
a weighted fair queuing scheduler.

@menu
* Thread Niceness::             
* Thread Weight::        
* Thread Vruntime::      
* Thread Ideal Runtime::  
* Sleeper Threads::      
* CFS Scheduler Summary::     
* Load Balancing::
@end menu

@node Thread Niceness
@section Niceness

Niceness is the traditional way in which Unix systems allow users to
express the relative importance of threads.
Each thread has an integer @var{nice} value that determines how ``nice''
the thread should be to other threads. A positive @var{nice}, to the
maximum of @w{@var{NICE_MAX} (19)}, decreases the priority of a thread,
thus causing it to give up some CPU time it would otherwise receive. On
the other hand, a negative @var{nice}, to the minimum of @var{NICE_MIN}
(-20), tends to take away CPU time from other threads. By default, each
thread has a @var{nice} value of @var{NICE_DEFAULT} (0). 

Pintos uses the functions described below to set and get nice values.

@deftypefun int thread_get_nice (void)
Returns the current thread's @var{nice} value.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void thread_set_nice (int @var{new_nice})
Sets the current thread's @var{nice} value to @var{new_nice}.
@end deftypefun

@node Thread Weight
@section Computing Weights

The @var{nice} value is not directly used to make scheduling decisions.
Instead, each thread is assigned an integer weight that is derived from
its @var{nice} value. Threads with lower @var{nice} values have higher
priority, and therefore are given higher weight. In contrast, threads with
higher @var{nice} values have lower weight. 
Threads with higher weights tend to not only be scheduled more often,
but run for longer periods of time when scheduled.

The following table shows the mapping from @var{nice} value to weight, 
as used in CFS.  All values are represented as unsigned 64-bit integers.

@verbatim
static const uint32_t prio_to_weight[40] =
  {
    /* -20 */    88761, 71755, 56483, 46273, 36291,
    /* -15 */    29154, 23254, 18705, 14949, 11916,
    /* -10 */    9548, 7620, 6100, 4904, 3906,
    /*  -5 */    3121, 2501, 1991, 1586, 1277,
    /*   0 */    1024, 820, 655, 526, 423,
    /*   5 */    335, 272, 215, 172, 137,
    /*  10 */    110, 87, 70, 56, 45,
    /*  15 */    36, 29, 23, 18, 15,
  }
@end verbatim

@node Thread Vruntime
@section Calculating Virtual Runtime @var{vruntime}

Each thread keeps track of its @var{vruntime}, which is short for
``virtual runtime.'' It is a normalized measure of how much CPU time
a thread has already consumed. @acronym{CFS} always selects the thread
with the lowest @var{vruntime} value when picking a task to run,
which represents the thread that is farthest behind relative to
its desired share.

If multiple threads have the same @var{vruntime} value, you should break ties 
by scheduling the thread with the lowest tid. (This tie breaker is needed only 
for the tests, it is not used in the actual CFS algorithm.)

A thread's virtual runtime increases linearly as a function of consumed CPU time @var{d}
where a thread's weight determines the rate of the increase.
Hence, given the same amount of CPU consumption, @var{vruntime}
increases more slowly for threads with higher weight and more quickly
for a thread with lower weight.

Specifically, @var{vruntime} is computed based on the thread's
consumed CPU time @var{d} and its weight @var{w} as follows:

@center @var{vruntime} = @var{vruntime_0} + @var{d} * @var{w0} / @var{w}

@noindent where 
@var{vruntime_0} is an initial value for the threads virtual runtime
set when the thread is added to the ready queue, and where
@var{w0} is the weight of a thread with a @var{nice} value of 0.
(64-bit integer arithmetic must be used for all @acronym{CFS} calculations.)

The very first thread's @var{vruntime_0} is initialized to 0, but consider
what would happen if the @var{vruntime_0} values of threads created later
were set to 0 as well: those threads would appear to have no CPU time
consumed at all, and would be preferred by the scheduler until they
caught up with the threads that were already running in the system.

Instead, CFS chooses as the initial value of @var{vruntime_0} for
newly created threads the minimum value of @var{vruntime}
of all threads already running or ready at that point.
This value, called @var{min_vruntime}, must be maintained 
for each ready queue.  

The scheduler must calculate the @var{vruntime} values of all
threads in accordance with their actual CPU consumption,
so that accurate values are used when the scheduler makes
decisions.  Specifically, your scheduler must use updated
values of @var{vruntime} when a new thread is created
and whenever a thread is unblocked.  

@node Thread Ideal Runtime
@section Calculating @var{ideal_runtime}

At each timer interrupt the scheduler needs to decide whether to
preempt the currently running thread or not.  A thread is preempted
if it has run for more than its ``ideal runtime,'' which represents
the length of this thread's time slice.  In @acronym{CFS}, the
length of a thread's time slice depends on its niceness:  higher 
priority threads receive longer time slices than lower priority
threads.

Specifically, the @var{ideal_runtime} is computed as

@center @var{ideal_runtime} = 4000000 * @var{n} * @var{w} / s

@noindent where @var{n} is the number of threads either running or ready
to run, @var{w} is the weight of the thread, and s is
the sum of weights of all threads that are either running or ready to run.
Since all of these variables may change as a thread runs, the preemption
decision should be made based on their current values when a timer
interrupt occurs.

Notice that in the common case where all threads have the same weight
(s = @var{n} * @var{w}), the ideal runtime is 4,000,000ns, or 4ms.
For example, assuming a timer frequency of 1000 Hz, if 2 CPU bound threads 
were running on a CPU, they would be taking turns every 4 clock ticks.

This time interval is long enough to avoid excessive context switch
overhead, but short enough so that users can perceive their
threads as making progress simultaneously.

@node Sleeper Threads
@section Handling I/O bound threads

I/O bound threads spend much of their time in the blocked state, waiting
for I/O operations to complete.  
(In the Linux kernel, they are referred to as ``sleepers.'')
An example is a program such as PowerPoint, which may run only
when a user presses a key to update a slide, then go back sleeping
to wait for more input.  To increase responsiveness, the scheduler
should schedule such threads as early as possible when they become 
ready.  Most general-purpose schedulers, @acronym{CFS} included,
include a special policy for this case.

When a thread is unblocked, its @var{vruntime} is likely to be lower
than that of other threads that did not sleep.  As in the case
of newly created threads discussed above, without adjustment, 
those threads would be scheduled by the scheduler until they have
caught up with the others.  Although this meets the goal of minimizing
latency, it is in general undesirable, particularly if the thread
now started using the CPU extensively.

To avoid this, @acronym{CFS} sets an unblocked thread's @var{vruntime}
to a slightly smaller value than @var{min_vruntime}, specifically:

@center @var{vruntime} = max(@var{vruntime}, @var{min_vruntime} - 20000000)

where 20000000 represents the ``sleeper bonus'' given to I/O bound 
processes when they wake up (unblock).  This adjustment tends to place
these threads at the front of the ready queue.

To avoid threads manipulating this system by intentionally sleeping,
the previous value of @var{vruntime} from when the thread began sleeping 
is included as a lower bound.  This ensures that a thread's @var{vruntime} 
cannot decrease, thus threads will not be receiving more CPU time than if 
they had been continuously ready.

Threads receiving a sleeper bonus may temporarily obtain a @var{vruntime} value
that is less than @var{min_vruntime}.  In this case, do not take
the @var{vruntime} of the thread receiving the bonus into account
when updating the ready queue's @var{min_vruntime}.  You must maintain 
the invariant that @var{min_vruntime} increases monotonically.

Keep in mind that unblocked threads are not necessarily added to the current
CPU's ready queue.  To preserve processor affinity, unblocked threads are
added to the CPU on which they last ran.

Since I/O bound threads require quick response times, your scheduler must arrange
for the unblocked thread to preempt the running thread 
if the idle thread is running, or if 
the @var{vruntime} of the newly unblocked thread is lower than that of the currently
running thread. To do so, it must return RETURN_YIELD from @func{sched_unblock}
in this case.
As a simplification for this project, you should treat all occasions in which
an existing thread is unblocked as if they were related to I/O.

@node CFS Scheduler Summary
@section Summary
A summary of the @acronym{CFS} algorithm is provided below:

@itemize
@item
    At each timer tick, preempt the current thread if it has run for at least @var{ideal_runtime}.
    When choosing which thread to run next, pick the thread with
    lowest @var{vruntime}. Break ties by choosing lowest tid.

@item Let @var{d} be the amount of CPU time consumed since a thread's
    @var{vruntime} was last updated, @var{w0} be the weight of a thread with
    0 @var{nice}, and @var{w} be the weight of the thread. Then:

    @center @var{vruntime} += @var{d} * @var{w0} / @var{w}

@item Maintain @var{min_vruntime}, the minimum value of @var{vruntime} of all
     running or ready threads.
     Both @var{vruntime} and @var{min_vruntime} are always nonnegative.

@item
    Let @var{n} be the number of threads either running or ready to run,
    @var{w} be the weight of the currently running thread, and s be the sum
    of weights of all threads that are either running or ready to run. Then:

    @center @var{ideal_runtime} = 4000000 * @var{n} * @var{w} / s

@item
    When a thread is unblocked for the first time, set its @var{vruntime} to:

    @center @var{initial_vruntime} = @var{min_vruntime}

@item
    When a thread is unblocked subsequently, set its @var{vruntime} to:

    @center @var{vruntime} = max(@var{vruntime}, @var{min_vruntime} - 20000000)

    If the vruntime of the unblocked thread is lower than that of the current
    thread, or if the CPU is idle, arrange for the CPU to yield.

@end itemize

@node Load Balancing
@section Load Balancing

Whereas the previous sections focused on the per-processor scheduling policy, this section
focuses on how CFS balances the load between CPUs.
This load balancing policy is specific towards the CFS scheduler because its load metric
is CFS specific. Thus we recommend that 
you get CFS working before attempting to implement load balancing. 
@c The only part your load balancer will not need working is sleeper threads.

When load balancing, a CPU moves threads from another CPU's ready queue to its own.
To decide whether to pull threads from another CPU's ready queue, @acronym{CFS}
examines the load on each CPU, represented by a variable @var{cpu_load}.
@var{cpu_load} is defined as the sum of the weights of all threads in the ready queue (notice that 
unlike the previous definition for sum of weights, @var{s} which was used to calculate @var{ideal_runtime}, the weight of the thread currently running 
on that CPU is not taken into account here). 

A CPU's @var{imbalance} is calculated as follows:

@center @var{imbalance} = (@var{busiest_cpu_load - my_load}) / 2

@noindent where @var{busiest_cpu_load} is the @var{cpu_load} of the CPU with highest 
load and @var{my_load} is the @var{cpu_load} of the CPU that is executing the load balancing. 

If @var{imbalance} is small (@var{imbalance} * 4 < @var{busiest_cpu_load}) 
then no rebalancing occurs. 
Otherwise,  CFS pulls threads from the busiest CPU to the CPU that initiated the load balancing.
It continues to do so until the aggregate weight of threads that have been 
migrated equals or exceeds @var{imbalance}.

Since threads' @var{vruntime} values are significant only when compared
to the @var{vruntime} of other threads on a CPU's local queue,  
the @var{vruntime} of threads in different CPUs' ready queues may 
be vastly different.  Therefore, the @var{vruntime} values of each of the migrated 
threads must be adjusted upon migration as follows:

@center @var{new_vruntime} = @var{old_vruntime} - @var{busiest_cpu_minvruntime} + @var{my_vruntime}

@noindent where @var{old_vruntime} is the thread's original @var{vruntime},
@var{busiest_cpu_minvruntime} is the @var{min_vruntime} of the busiest CPU and
@var{my_minvruntime} is the @var{min_vruntime} of the CPU that initiated
the load balancing.  This adjustment will allow a thread to retain an
sleeper bonus it may have had.  The @var{min_vruntime} of the receiving CPU
is not updated.  Make sure that @var{vruntime} stays nonnegative.

@html
</CENTER>
@end html
