@node institutioninstructions
@appendix Instructions for Virginia Tech students

These instructions pertains only to usage at Virginia Tech.

As of Spring 2017, most of the files related to Pintos can be found at
@file{/home/courses/cs3204/bin}. We recommend adding this to your PATH.

@file{/home/courses/cs3204/bin/pintos} is the script we use to run Pintos.

RLogin supports KVM, therefore Pintos can also be run under qemu's KVM
acceleration support. This can make Pintos run about 5x faster.
This is particularly helpful if you are trying to reproduce a rare race condition.
We will not use KVM during grading, and we do 
not recommend using it for Project 1, where tests make assumptions on how fast
programs are expected to run. To run Pintos with KVM, use 
@file{/home/courses/cs3204/bin/pintos-kvm}. To see if your personal computer
supports KVM, check if @file{/dev/kvm} exists. Note that VirtualBox does not
provide guest operating systems with the KVM module. Finally, be aware that
KVM can sometimes make GDB extremely frustrating to use.

We encourage you to develop and test on a local machine. 
There is an easy way to do this.

@enumerate 1
@item
Install Centos 7. Centos 6 will probably work, but then you will
want devtoolset-2, which provides an updated version of gcc.

@item
Create a user account called "courses". Inside the home directory,
create a folder called "cs3204". This is because RLogin's 
@file{/home/courses/cs3204/} is folder hardcoded as a path the Pintos script.

@item
Recursively copy the following folders: @file{/home/courses/cs3204/bin} and 
@file{/home/courses/cs3204/share} into your local 
@file{/home/courses/cs3204} folder. The @file{bin} folder contains a 
QEMU executable and Pintos scripts. The @file{share} folder contains
the PC BIOS that QEMU will use to start Pintos.

@item
You should now have an environment set up where you can run Pintos. @xref{Running Pintos}.

@end enumerate

For now, we DON'T encourage Bochs. It has not been tested under the new system
at all. None of the tests will run the Bochs emulator.

Since this is our first semester releasing the updated version of Pintos, please 
let us know if you think you may have found bugs in the base code, or 
if think any clarifications should be made. Email Lance Chao at @email{kisseki@@vt.edu}.

